# Multidimensional Accounting Demo

This is an interactive demo app that shows a few multidmensional accounting concepts, especially in relation to discovery work carried out in Q3 2025 and what we want to deliver in the first increment for Q4 2025.

## Design system
I want to use the Reshaped design system for the page. The app will be built with vite and deployed at the URL /demo on a public server.

## The app

The app is a single page with LocalStorage for persistence. The SKR accounts and dimensions will be provided in a JSON file.
The app shows the 3 stage process: breaking 'traditional' bookings into dimensional bookings, storing them in a dimensional journal, and then transforming them back again.
The app is split into 5 panels: Accounts, Bookings, Journal, Export and Reports
At the bottom of the page, the multidimensional journal can be queried to show the bookings (and the total of those bookings) with a simple query editor.

## Accounts
Accounts have a number and a number of dimensions (e.g. class:revenue, vat:19, etc.). These dimensions should be represented using the Badge component.
For the app, accounts are a read-only list at the top of the page.

The initial accounts in the demo will be:
1406 - Abziehbare Vorsteuer 19 %
3806 - Umsatzsteuer 19 %
6300 – Sonstige betriebliche Aufwendungen
1800 - Bank 
4400 - Revenue
6815 - Bürobedarf
0670 - Geringwertige Wirtschaftsgüter
6262 - Abschreibungen auf aktivierte GWG

## Entering bookings (Bookings Panel)

A booking is an entry with a date and a reference. The user can click "add booking", which adds a blank booking Card to the page.
When adding a booking, booking_positions can be added by clicking "Add position".
A position has a SKR04 account (Select component), a debit/credit side (Radio buttons) and an amount in Euros.
The booking is highlighted in red when the sum of the debit position items minus the sum of the credit position items do not add up to zero.

## Splitting into dimensions (Journal)
The Journal is read-only in this demo. It is created by looping over the bookings and booking positions to create Journal Entries and Line Items.
For each booking position, we look up the dimensions belonging to the relevant SKR account in the JSON and output (using the Badge component) the dimensions in the format name:value.
The SKR account number is not shown in the journal, only the dimensions.

## Reconstructing booking records
We then loop over in a table converting the dimensions back to SKR accounts in the format:

JournalEntry.date | JournalEntry.reference | SKR account (calculated) | LineItem.Amount (if debit) | LineItem.Amount (if credit)

This will include entries generated by the automatic behavior below.

### Note on automatic behavior
If a dimension on a LineItem is called VAT (e.g. vat:19 or vat:7), and it also has class expense or revenue, we will deduct the VAT from the Journal Entry before it is written to the journal.
We will take the amount of tax deducted from the gross amount and create a new LineItem which has the same dimensions as the expense or revenue item, and the amount of tax that was included. The class will be replaced with "asset" if the input was an expense or "liability" if the input was revenue. 

## Todo: Define reports
We'll add a reports panel in a future iteration. It will contain a text area where a predicate can be entered by the user, and added to the page as a preview for reports.

## Dates
Dates should be selected using the Calendar component. (in the demo, we'll ignore more granular datetimes)

## References
We should use the format urn:{document_type}:1234 for references, where document_type is invoice or expense
